500 Years Since Luther’s Reformation - What Now?
================================================

 

2017 marks 500 years since Martin Luther caused a major theological firestorm in
Germany, which spilled over into all of Europe and became the catalytic event of
a process that had been in the making since the 14th century.

 

What do we know about the Reformation of the Middle Ages, what does it mean to
us today, if anything and where do we go from here?

 

I offer the following thoughts on this very interesting subject and I welcome
your feedback and input as well.

 

**1. There were multiple reformations **

 

It’s pretty sad that with all the information technology available today,
there’s still very little quality information easily available online where most
people can go and “get the scoop” on this subject, if that’s even possible. But
any serious student of the Reformation period (the two century period between
1450 and 1650, will tell you that there were in fact multiple reformatory
movements going on, all of them unique in their own right.  
  
Why am I bringing up 1450 as sort of a starting point for this time period in
Christian history? Well, this the year when Gutenberg’s printing press became
operational in Meinz, Germany. Another major event was announced in 1450 - Pope
Nicolas V decided to demolish the old 4th century basilica of St. Peter in Rome
and to construct a new, grandiose basilica in it’s place. Ironically, it was the
process of raising money for the basilica through the sale of indulgences, that
infuriated Martin Luther and caused him to challenge the teachings of Rome on
matters related to the salvation of the soul. Had there been no printing press,
Luther’s writing could have never reached other parts of Germany and Europe and
the Protestant Reformation might have never taken place. Had there been no great
Pope Nicolas V and his grandiose project, there might have been no catalytic
event and no Reformation.

 

By 1500 one could find a printing press in all major cities in Europe, and in
fact all over Europe, with the highest concentration of printing presses in
Germany and Switzerland.  
  
Thus, the reformation spilled over into Switzerland, England,
